% Application Note: Building COPRTHR SDK for Intel MIC
% Copyright (c) 2014 Brown Deer Technology, LLC
% *Verbatim copying and distribution of this entire document is
  permitted in any medium, provided this notice is preserved.*
 
# Introduction

The COPRTHR SDK supports the Intel MIC architecture and may be used on
platforms with Intel Xeon Phi accelerators.  This Application Note provides
details for building and configuring COPRTHR on these platforms.  Support
requires the "Freewill" release of the COPRTHR SDK v1.6, as well as Standard
components of the Intel software stack for MIC should also be installed prior
to beginning.

This Application Note provides details on the following topics:

* Building basic COPRTHR SDK support for a MIC host
* Building COPRTHR SDK for MIC native execution 
* Cross-compiling kernels for MIC native execution
* Configuring a CLRPC server for networked MIC accelerators

&nbsp;

----------


# Building Basic COPRTHR SDK Support for a MIC Host

The basic components of the COPRTHR SDK may be used to target a MIC accelerator
in the same way that it is used to target a GPU.  In particular, the STDCL
API and clcc tools can be used to develop portable code and taken together 
provide a powerful code development tool.  

&nbsp;


## Configure the package

### For root installation as a priveleged admin

If you have root access, the build itself should work with all of the defaults.
The target install directory will be `/usr/local/browndeer`.
If the Intel compiler is the default C/C++ compiler used, 
at the present time it may be necessary 
to disable Fortran bindings in libstdcl using `--with-fortran=` with no
value provided following the equal (=) sign.  

The complete commandline would simply be,

~~~~~~~
./configure --with-fortran= --enable-mic-cross-compile
~~~~~~~

If the pre-requisites libelf (libelf-0.8.13), libconfig, or libevent have been
installed in non-standard locations, the options `--with-libelf`,
`--with-libconfig`, and `--with-libevent` may be used to make adjustments.  
See `./configure --help` for a full listing of customizations.

### For user installation as an unpriveleged user

If you do not have root access on the platform it is still possible to do a
private "user install".  The following paths are assumed to be defined:
`LIBELF_DIR`, `LIBCONFIG_DIR`, `LIBEVENT_DIR`, corresponding to the install
locations of libelf (libelf-0.8.13), libconfig, and libevent.  Additionally we
will assume the target installation directory is `COPRTHR_INSTALL_DIR`.

~~~~~~~
./configure --prefix=$COPRTHR_INSTALL_DIR --with-libelf=$LIBELF_DIR \
	--with-libconfig=$LIBCONFIG_DIR --with-libevent=$LIBEVENT_DIR \
	--with-opencl-icd-path=$COPRTHR_INSTALL_DIR/etc/OpenCL/vendors \
	--enable-user-install --with-fortran= --enable-mic-cross-compile
~~~~~~~

See `./configure --help` for a full listing of customizations.

&nbsp;


## Build and install the package

This part is easy. If configured for a root installation type,

	make
	sudo make install

If configured for a user installation type,

	make
	make install

That's it.  Note that `make clean` will remove files generated by the build
process and `make distclean` will restored things to their pre-configure
state.

&nbsp;


## Update your PATH and LD_LIBRARY_PATH

Once installed, ensure that your environment variables PATH and LD_LIBRARY_PATH
have been updated as directed by the messages printed to the screen when you
typed `make install`.  

... No, seriously, update these environment variables.  Failure to
do so causes at least 50% of the emails asking why the SDK does not work.

&nbsp;


## Configuration of ocl.conf

The file `ocl.conf` controls the OpenCL platforms seen by the COPRTHR loader
`libocl.so` which should be used in place of the Khronos defined loader,
`libOpenCL.so`.  On some platforms it may make sense to alias libocl.so to
libOpenCL.so,

	ln -s libocl.so libOpenCL.so 

This step is not done by default. 

The search path for the controling ocl.conf file provides for increasing
specialization from the system level to the individual user, and specifically
follows:

	./ocl.conf
	./.ocl.conf
	$HOME/ocl.conf
	$HOME/.ocl.conf
	/etc/ocl.conf


The ocl.conf file provides an opportunity for precisely controling the OpenCL
configuration of a given system.  In order to ensure that the Intel OpenCL SDK
is seen by the loader, the appropriate line should be added to the platforms
section of the controling ocl.conf file.  Failure to properly configure this
file is a common cause of problems.  The ocl.conf file is very flexible and
easy to setup.  See Section 3 of the COPRTHR Primer for more details.

&nbsp;


## Testing

Following the installation, a quick test may be performed to indicate 
whether the installation was successful and properly configured.

From the root directory of the COPRTHR SDK package type,

	make quicktest

The results should be self-explanatory.  

&nbsp;

----------


# Building COPRTHR SDK for MIC Native Execution 

The COPRTHR SDK may be built for MIC native execution.  However, some
limitations arise due to the fact that the MIC accelerator cards will be
running a stripped-down Linux kernel.  An example is just-in-time (JIT)
compilation support from an application running native since the Intel compiler
will not be available on the card, only on the host as part of the standard
Intel compiler installation.  Nevertheless most of the run-time libraries are
supported including the core libraries libstdcl, libcoprthr, libcoprthr_opencl,
and libclrpc.  The lack of JIT compilation support is easily overcome since
COPRTHR provides robust support for pre-cross-compiled kernels.

&nbsp;

## Configuration

Building the COPRTHR SDK for MIC native execution requires cross-compilation on
the host using --enable-user-install configuration option.  In order to support
the cross-compilation the path to the location of the required MIC libraries
must be specified.  This should be the location where the libimf.so library
built for MIC is installed on the host as part of the Intel SDK.  This
directory will be designated MIC_LIBS_DIR.

Prior to building COPRTHR it will be necessary to build the packages libelf
(libelf-0.8.13), libconfig, and libevent for the MIC architecture, and specify
the location(s) for these packages using MIC_LIBELF_DIR, MIC_LIBCONFIG_DIR,
MIC_LIBEVENT_DIR, respectively.

The location where the COPRTHR SDK build should be (temporarily) installed
is designated IC_COPRTHR_INSTAL_DIR.  This is a temporary location since
all of the packages will need to be copied over to the MIC accelerator card.

The configuration is then performed with the commandline,

~~~~~~~
CC=icc CFLAGS=-mmic ./configure --prefix=$MIC_COPRTHR_INSTALL_DIR \
	--with-libelf=$MIC_LIBELF_DIR --with-libconfig=$MIC_LIBCONFIG_DIR \
	--with-libevent=$MIC_LIBEVENT_DIR \
	--with-opencl-icd-path=$MIC_COPRTHR_INSTALL_DIR/etc/OpenCL/vendors \
	--enable-user-install --with-fortran= --host=k1om-unknown-linux-gnu \
	--with-lib-mic=$MIC_LIBS_DIR
~~~~~~~

----------

&nbsp;


# Cross-Compiling Kernels for MIC Native Execution

The absence of JIT compilation support when running with MIC native execution
can be mitigated using cross-compilation support for kernels provided by
the COPRTHR SDK.  This cross-compilation support is simply an extension of
the robust support provided for a standard compilation model and workflow - 
something OpenCL lack.  There are two approaches - one that works now,
and one that will hopefully work in the near future.  We will mention first
what does not work and why.

The obvious solution for the lack of native JIT compilation support for MIC
is to use the COPRTHR `clcc` compiler tools to produce a linkable object file
with embedded kernels for MIC and then link this pre-compiled object file into
the application cross-compiled for MIC.  At present, there is an issue with
this approach since the object file that `clcc` produces will be "marked" as an
ELF file for the x86_64 host even if the embedded kernels are for the MIC
accelerator.  This reflects the standard offload use-case.  

As a work-around, the ability of `clcc` to generate the raw pre-compiled kernel
binary, using the `--dump-bin` option, can be exploited to accomplish something
very close to what we would like to do.  The key is that the STDCL `clopen()`
call supports both source and binary files, and will automatically detect a raw
binary and load the pre-compiled kernels dynamically.

Given kernel code in the file `my_kernel.cl`,

	] clcc --coprthr-cc -mtarget=mic --dump-bin my_kernel.cl

will produce the binary file `my_kernel.clbin.3.mic`.

Then, from within host code compiled for MIC native execution, the pre-compiled
binary can be loaded using a single STDCL call to `clopen()`,

	...
	void* clh = clopen(stdacc,"my_kernel.clbin.3.mic",CLLD_NOW);
	...

For more information see the STDCL API Reference and the COPRTHR Primer.

----------

&nbsp;


# Configuring a CLRPC server for networked MIC accelerators

MIC accelerators may be accessed directly over a network which enables the
capability of setting up CLRPC servers to form multi-node networks of
OpenCL devices accessible through a single STDCL context.  Building the
COPRTHR SDK for MIC native execution will build the necessary library and
server executable by default.  In this section the steps required for
setting up such a network will be discussed.

The COPRTHR SDK should be installed on each MIC accelerator card which
typically will be running a stripped-down Linux kernel and an essentially
bare filesystem requiring you to "bring what you need" in order to 
execute a simple program.  On each accelerator card, run a CLRPC server
using,

	] clrpcd -i eth0 

On any host platform from which the accelerator cards are accessible, the
`clprc` section of the controling `ocl.conf` file should be modified so that
the section itself is not commented out, and a list of IP addresses for the MIC
accelerators running CLRPC servers is provded.  

As an example, assume that we have four (4) MIC accelerators within a platform
configured such that the accelerator cards have IP address 10.0.2.1 - 10.0.2.4.
The required modification to the `ocl.conf` file would be the addition of the
section below:

	clrpc = {
		enable = "yes";
		servers = (
			{ url="10.0.2.1:2112" },
			{ url="10.0.2.2:2112" },
			{ url="10.0.2.3:2112" },
			{ url="10.0.2.4:2112" }
		);
	};

The above modifications will cause the `libocl.so` loader to provide an
application code using OpenCL a unique OpenCL platform for each server
represented the exported resources.  Using the STDCL API the resources are
combined to form a single context.  The result is that the application code
will "see" a context, `stdnpu`, containing four (4) MIC accelerators with
device numbers 0,1,2, and 3.

So for example, a STDCL query to determine the number of available devices
would show `ndev` equal to 4,

	size_t ndev = clgetndev(stdnpu);

The STDCL context `stdnpu` may be used like any other context and applications
designed with a multi-device capability will be able to use all of the
networked devices.
	
For more information on CLRPC, see Section 7 of the COPRTHR Primer.	

&nbsp;

----------

Document revision 16.0.0.0

