# Test Scripts

For Linux and FreeBSD installatons, a set of test scripts are provided as a
quick check to verify the installation.  (For detailed instructions describing
the installation of the COPRTHR SDK, see the release notes for the specific
version being installed.) Passing these tests does not guarantee trouble free
operation. However, failing to pass these tests provides an immediate
indication that something is wrong. There are two sets of test scripts designed
to test libstdcl and libocl. The tests themselves consist of kernels and C code
automatically generated by a set of PERL scripts. The full suite of tests will
execute close to 3,000 unique OpenCL kernels executions. There are two variants
- the "test" and the "quicktest" - and it is highly advisable to use the
quicktest unless you plan to let your machine run for an hour or so. After
installation, the tests can be executed from the root COPRTHR directory by
typing either:

	] make quicktest

or 

	] make test

At this point you will see a lot of activity generating and compiling the tests. 
Once the tests begin to run, success or failure is easy to discern since each 
test will output either [pass] or [fail] to the screen. If all tests pass,
things are looking good. If you find that a test has failed, something is wrong
with the installation. Inspection of the problematic test can provide useful
information as to what may have went wrong. A test can be re-run to provide 
debug information by executing:

	] cldebug -- ./test_<name>.x --size 65536 --blocksize 16 

where ./test_<name>.x refers to the specific test that failed.

Windows 7 installation can be tested using the examples provided in
msvs2010/examples/ .

Please note that the code used in these tests is *absolutely not* a useful way
to learn how to use SDK. The code is generated by scripts and will be
relatively unintelligible. The examples/ directory is the best place to get
started learning about the SDK and how it simplifies the use of OpenCL.

